[music]
>> Bloomberg Audio Studios. Podcasts,
radio, news.
>> [music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Lots podcast. [music] I'm Tracy
Alloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal.
>> Joe, if you were a Roman general
or a feudal lord
>> [music]
>> and you wanted to wage war on your
next-door neighbors. I don't know, this
is completely hypothetical.
>> Yeah.
>> What time of year
>> Indeed. Yes, really?
>> What time of year do you think would be
the best time to actually do it?
>> You know, I haven't thought about this
before if I'm being totally honest.
>> You're not sitting at home thinking
about if you were a Roman general at all
hours of the day.
>> I'm the one guy who doesn't think about
stuff like that. I don't know much about
Rome. I don't Go on.
>> Okay.
So, for much of human history, if you
were going to go to war, you would try
to avoid certain times of year and those
times were generally the spring sowing
season
>> Mhm.
>> and the fall harvest. And there's two
reasons you would do that. One is
because a lot of your soldiers are
actually farmers.
>> Okay.
>> They're part-time soldiers. So, their
day job is farming. And the second one
is you don't want to completely disrupt
your food supply, right?
>> That makes a ton of sense. I hadn't
thought about that, but yes, makes a ton
of sense.
>> All right. So, fast forward to 2026 and
we've clearly forgotten much of human
history because we have a US Israeli war
against Iran that is coming at perhaps
the worst possible time in terms of
agriculture.
>> You know, again, I hadn't thought about
this at all. So, I did learn over the
last week, you know, when I think about
the shutdown of the Strait of Hormuz and
so forth. Obviously, I think oil and
energy. I have become aware through your
writing and others that it's also major
choke point or major throughway for
related foodstuffs including fertilizer.
I had not heard anything about the
timing element, however, until you just
brought it up just now.
>> Yeah, so everyone's getting ready for
spring planting at the moment. So this
is precisely when you theoretically
would be using a lot of fertilizer and
just in the past week or so we've seen
prices for urea, which is, you know, one
of the I guess most popular types of
fertilizer, those have shot up like 25%.
>> Yeah.
>> It's also fascinating to me, I didn't
know this, but we have all these
different types of urea. So you have
Egyptian granular urea, New Orleans
urea. We're going to talk about all of
it. I've wanted to do a fertilizer
episode for a long time. I want to talk
about what's going on with the Moroccan
fertilizer industry as well, but I am I
am weirdly excited to be talking about
urea today.
>> I'm looking forward to it. Let's do it.
>> All right, and we have the perfect
guest. We're going to be speaking with
Alexis Maxwell. She's an analyst on the
Bloomberg Intelligence Agriculture team
and she's been writing a lot about this.
So Alexis, thank you so much for coming
on Odd Lots.
>> Oh, thank you for having me.
>> Is that framing correct? Is this kind of
not a great time  the worst
possible time to be driving the price of
fertilizer up?
>> Yeah, definitely.
I couldn't think of a worse time to have
a supply side shock and resulting surge
in fertilizer prices for farmers
effectively
just about everywhere. Second quarter is
the timeline when the northern
hemisphere starts their planting season.
>> What is urea?
>> Yeah, so urea is the most commonly used
form of nitrogen. Crops are going to
demand a variety of fertilizers, but the
big three that you have to use are going
to be your nitrogen, phosphate, and
potash. And in the industry we call it
your NPKs.
Urea is a form of nitrogen. I think
about this like a step ladder. If you
want urea, the way that you get it is by
starting first with natural gas, you
crack it into ammonia, and then you run
another chemical conversion on it, and
you turn it into a granular product that
is easy to apply, easy to transport, and
is about 46% nitrogen. And for those of
you who've never applied fertilizer or
planted crops, you've probably bought
some flowers at some point in your life.
And you get a little packet that has
some like white crystals in it. You're
going to have urea in there to help your
flowers grow.
>> I didn't know that. That's interesting.
Okay, so one thing I know about
fertilizer, other than most of it smells
pretty bad, but you always hear this
thing about the Haber-Bosch process, and
how the guy who basically,
I guess, invented the way we get
fertilizer nowadays is responsible both
for a massive boom in the human
population because everyone gets to eat
more, but also responsible for a lot of
death at the same time. Can you talk
about the I guess the origins of all of
this?
>> Yeah, I think I've I'll call it one of
the greatest paradoxes of humanity. You
know, Tracy, I can't think of an
invention that on one hand is more
responsible for billions of lives, but
also at the same time generates a
product that is used as a weapon of war.
And some people will tell you, you know,
with the global population just over 7
billion, about half of the people on the
earth today are here because of
conventional fertilizers.
If we were to, let's just say tomorrow,
stop using conventional fertilizer, and
we converted everything back to organic,
and we farmed every single acre of
arable land out there, they say that the
earth could really only support a
population of about 4 billion people.
So, conventional fertilizer is, I think,
the most important invention to the most
number of people on this planet.
>> So, wait. Okay, explain to me So, urea
comes from It's downstream from natural
gas. And so, explain to me like what
happens like why not ship the gas? I
mean, right now nothing is shipping or
very little is moving through the
strait. But, why is the process such
that the first step, the transformation
of natural gas to urea, happens at the
source rather than later down somewhere
else in the supply chain?
>> Yeah, so you'll find nitrogen fertilizer
plants will often be co-located
with natural gas because to ship natural
gas, you have to chill it to very low
temperatures and it's very expensive to
move it. In contrast, urea is It's a
granular. You can ship it in a as a bulk
commodity item. It's much cheaper to do
it that way and you can reach a vast
number of people. You'll find urea
plants around the world, but most of
them are really located in places with
low-cost gas because this is a
competitive competitive commodity
industry. So, you'll see these plants in
places like Russia, the Middle East, the
United States, and China.
>> Yeah, it's like It reminds me a little
bit of like aluminum. Like, here is this
thing that it's like, "Okay, you can
ship it anywhere in the world. It's a
lot easier to ship aluminum than it is
to transport electricity via batteries."
So, you have the aluminum processing
co-located where you have cheap
electricity and then it, of course, it's
sort of trivial to move it elsewhere.
How much of the world's urea is in
conflict-affected regions right now?
>> I just want to add one thing, too, about
about the urea and why we we ship it. It
has a very strong seasonality. So, you
know, when you run a large chemical
manufacturing plant, you want to capture
the economies of scale and you want to
run your plant 365 days a year.
>> Right.
>> But, the problem that we see in the
fertilizer industry is that farmers only
demand urea at a very short period of
the year. Let's just say like 2 months
of the year. So, that puts these
manufacturers in a
sort of classic snake and egg supply
chain problem. What do you do with the
material the rest of the year? So, it's
much easier to ship it out than it is to
store it and keep it on hand for farmers
10 months out and to take that price
risk.
>> Oh, wait. Now, I'm really interested.
Can How storable is urea actually? Cuz I
think about those little packets, they
seem like they could last for quite a
while.
>> they last a while.
>> Yeah, if you have urea and you can put
it in a warehouse and you can have it
covered from the rain and possibly other
elements, you can probably keep it on
hand for at least a couple of months,
probably three, four, five months.
However, you know, if you have a
warehouse, the way that you really
maximize the value of a warehouse is by
turning the inventory in your warehouse
and selling that. So, when you put urea
in a warehouse, you're taking on
price risk over the period that sits in
that it will sit in storage and you're
not using your warehouse for what it's
really designed for. So, a lot of what
we see with these urea facilities, it's
make and ship. There isn't a strategic
reserve of urea the same way that we
would have it like in oil, for example,
which is partially why this crisis is
really compounding for urea at this time
of year.
We don't have
significant storage to replace what
we're losing in the Middle East. Now,
the Middle East, if we look at the
countries that are located along the
Persian Gulf, about 45% of the world's
tradeable urea comes from the Middle
East, and about about 20% of the ammonia
comes from along the the Middle East as
well.
So, if you are in the business of trying
to procure a replacement for what we've
lost in the Middle East,
there's not really a good next best
alternative at this point in time.
You could try going to Russia to procure
material, but a lot of the West has
sanctioned Russia and their fertilizer
products.
You could try going to China, but China
has an export ban currently on their
urea fertilizers, and that's done to
protect their domestic industry and
their farmers.
And that really kind of leaves you left
over with places like Egypt or maybe the
United States.
>> So, is most of the urea from the Middle
East is most of it going to Asia?
>> So, the Middle East is a great supplier
for urea. They ship effectively
everywhere. Every single day they're in
the market. You know, a urea plant in
the Middle East, just to keep their
inventory sort of in balance, a lot of
these producers are loading one vessel
and shipping it every single day.
And so, where the shipments go from the
Middle East depends on what time of year
it is. So, when farmers are demanding
product like European farmers or
American farmers in the second quarter,
you'll see more of the Middle Eastern
urea go there. But, in the second half
of the year, you're going to see a lot
more of the urea move to places like
India and Brazil, places that have a
flipped season to the Northern
Hemisphere and plant at a different
time.
>> Okay, this is my chance. What's the deal
with fertilizer in Morocco? Cuz I
remember when I was in Abu Dhabi, there
were a lot of, you know, big national
companies that were very excited about
striking some sort of fertilizer deals
with Morocco. What's going on there?
>> Yes, so Morocco is among the world's one
of the world's largest producers of
phosphate. So, phosphate is one of those
critical NPK nutrients.
Morocco is expanding their phosphate
production and they're low cost and
because of their location in Africa,
it's relatively cheap freight to get it
to move around the world. I think of
phosphate to the Moroccan economy a
little bit like oil to the
>> [music]
>> Saudi economy.
[music]
>> So, if I'm looking at a 10-year chart of
back to Egyptian, but Egyptian urea
prices, they soared to over $1,100 a
metric ton in the wake of Russia's
invasion of Ukraine. That peak looks
like around spring, April 2022. They got
down to about a little under $300 a
metric ton in 2024. They're close to 600
now. Before we get to the effects of
what 600 a ton urea, what the impact of
that is, what was the impact on the 2022
price spike? What were the domino
effects of that massive surge?
>> Yes, so the
2022 price surge was really two supply
side shocks. In 2021, China started
their export ban on urea and phosphate
fertilizers. And the importance of China
to the fertilizer market, it really it
cannot be overstated. So, China is the
marginal producer for urea and
phosphate. So, generally speaking, when
China is exporting fertilizers, prices
globally will tend to fall. And when
China is out of the market, prices rise
to the next level of production costs.
And so, in September of 2021, when China
slammed the door on exports, the world
had to really scramble for alternatives
to supply.
And then, when we had the Russian
invasion into Ukraine in the first
quarter of 2022, we saw fertilizer
prices spike on top of that because the
world was
unclear about how we could source
fertilizers from Russia. So, Russia is a
high-volume exporter, they're a low-cost
producer, and Russia also is probably
the really the only country that will do
high-volume exports of nitrogen,
phosphate, and potash. You name the
flavor of fertilizer that you want, you
can get it out of Russia.
And so, there was just this general
surge in the industry to try to find an
alternative. You know, and I mentioned
earlier that when we took China out of
the market,
fertilizer prices had to go above the
marginal producer level production costs
in China and bid in new supply. And the
way that the nitrogen cost curve is
oriented, that meant the world had to go
to Europe to find new sources of
nitrogen and turn those plants on in
order to meet demand. Well, at the time,
the price for natural gas in Europe,
which is the feedstock for ammonia and
then eventually urea, was surging over
$60 per MMBTU. And so, if you wanted to
run the economics of what it costs to
make ammonia, it's a very easy
back-of-the-napkin math to do this. It
takes about 34 to 36 MMBTUs
of natural gas to produce one ton of
ammonia. But if we needed 36 MMBTU's to
make ammonia and I'm paying $60 for
natural gas, I'm looking at an ammonia
price that's over $2,100.
>> So, if I'm a farmer in the US right now
and I am getting ready to plant spring
wheat,
what am I doing when I you know, I'm
hopefully I have a Bloomberg terminal.
That would be nice as a farmer, but I'm
looking at the chart of the price spike
in something like urea. What am I
thinking to myself in terms of
offsetting this cost?
>> Yeah, so farmers will have
probably four options or decisions that
they can make at this point. And I will
tell you I do think that US farmers are
probably best poised to weather this
storm compared to farmers in let's say
the European Union or India at this
point.
If you're a farmer, what you can choose
to do is you can reduce your application
rates. You can switch what you're
planting, let's say from corn to shift
into soybeans, which demands
significantly less amounts of nitrogen.
The third option is as a US farmer, you
can switch among your nitrogen products.
And then the last worst option is just
not plant at all.
>> And what do you see happening right now?
There was a headline by the way earlier
that I saw, where already senators in DC
are hearing from farmers talking about
wanting to get relief from wanting to
get some sort of bailout. It's not as
extreme, but you know, the price is to
some extent global and so we see the New
Orleans price, that's shooting up too.
That's at 570
570 pounds a ton.
>> Yeah, so this is really all, you know,
as in economics, this is all really
relative. So, I want to just give some
context as to why, even though, you
know, Egypt urea is like
I think today close to $700. Still below
about 1/3 below the 22 price spike.
What's happening now is probably the
worst it's ever been for farmers looking
to buy nitrogen. And we measure that in
the industry by just looking at the urea
price to the crop price ratio.
>> Oh, that makes sense.
>> Yeah, it's all relative. You know, that
last incremental ton of nitrogen is
going to give you a yield bump. So, you
kind of you want to run the economics
and the agronomy on if I spend a little
bit more on my nitrogen, am I going to
get that yield bump? So, I need to know
what the price of the commodity is. And
if I were today to look at the urea to
corn price ratio
>> Yeah.
>> last week it was at 124.
The highest it's ever been is 143.
And with the price surge that we're
seeing again this week, I expect once we
have prices settle on Friday that will
set a new record for the most expensive
that urea has ever been to a corn
farmer.
>> Tracy, this is going to make a good
chart in the newsletter because I I just
charted it as as our guest was talking
about it. And yes, we are very close to
the So, even though on a the pure urea
price not necessarily at all-time highs,
but relative to corn we are very close
to all-time highs there.
>> Yeah, I think this is important. So,
the other thing I wanted to ask is you
you've heard I mean, it's a running joke
on the show that farmers are always
complaining about something. But, one of
the things they've complained about is
fertilizer prices even before,
you know, the Iran situation, even
before the 2022
price spike, there's been some
grumbling. What's going on in the
structure of the market that seems to
make fertilizer prices an issue for the
farming industry?
>> Yeah, so the farming industry in the US
right now is
margins are incredibly thin. If we look
at like for example, the difference
between what farmers pay for their
inputs versus the prices that they get
for their agricultural products, it hit
a record negative spread in January.
There's a lot of price pain out there in
the US farm economy, and we're seeing
Chapter 12 bankruptcies. Chapter 12 is a
specialized form of bankruptcy for
farms and fisheries starting to pick up
here in 2025. So, I'll say the economic
pain is real. And if you look at
fertilizer prices, they tend to cycle
just like all other commodities.
The last time we really saw an amplified
price cycle for fertilizer was '07 and
'08, kind of in line with the financial
crisis.
But what makes this different is in
contrast to I think it was a more of a
demand cycle in '07 and '08 that caused
the amplification, but this time this is
a supply-side crisis. You know, I think
about this as like a three-legged stool.
We've taken China out of the market.
Russian supply seemed difficult to
acquire. And now you throw in We have
this global choke point for urea in the
Strait of Hormuz, where almost, let's
say, you know, 40% of the nitrogen that
we need is
you can't get it.
Those are the supply-side drivers that
are keeping fertilizer prices at
mid-cycle level for
I think much longer than many in the
industry would have expected when this
started in 2020, 2021.
>> When you say you can't get it, do you
foresee a situation where you can't get
it at any price, basically?
>> Oh, Tracy, my my econ professor would
roll over in his grave if [laughter] I
ever said that, but I'll just kick it
back to, you know, applying fertilizer,
you know, you have to do it when the
crop wants it. So, that's really
pre-planting and during like early
emergence of your crop. It's You know,
having a kid and needing to feed them,
you know,
vitamins at a at a certain point in
their as they start to grow.
>> That's right. Everyone knows after
they're 3 years old, you don't have to
feed them anymore. They fend for
themselves. [laughter]
>> They're good. They're good. They're good
at that point.
>> Yeah. You're on your own. Go fix me a
hot dog. Yeah, so if you miss the urea
application window, you it's really
difficult to go back or nearly
impossible to go back and apply
nitrogen. You just will have to take the
yield penalty.
>> Yeah, it's interesting, you know, again,
just looking at the pure urea chart, you
mentioned, you know, some of the legs of
the stool have already been kicked out.
So, the lowest it got after the
invasion of Ukraine was still not
anywhere close to say pre-Ukraine or
pre-pandemic levels at all. So, we've
shifted into a higher regime generally
even before the war in Iran. So, when
we're talking about oil markets, we know
that there's infrastructure that's
already been destroyed. So, even if the
Strait of Hormuz is opened in short
time, there's infrastructure that's been
damaged, and of course, we know wells
have been shut in because they're
running out of storage space for oil.
What do we know about the fertilizer
infrastructure period? Say, you know,
the damage that's been done, and so
like, you know, say there's a miracle,
and suddenly things started flowing
through the Strait of Hormuz immediately
tomorrow, which doesn't seem very
likely. What do we know just about the
condition of the infrastructure and how
long it would take things to get moving
again?
>> Yeah, that's a great question. I think
we'd be looking at least 2 weeks before
you'd start to see fertilizer come out
along the the strait again. We haven't
seen much in the way of these facilities
being attacked directly. And so, a lot
of the manufacturing sites have shut
down preemptively. And so then to
restart a fertilizer facility, it's
going to take two or three days of a
natural gas burn just to get the plant
to where it is producing urea again. And
then you have to load a You have to
bring a vessel in. You have to load the
vessel. You have to get it back out. And
you know, nobody at this point has any
clarity on when the straight reopens,
who gets first priority? Is it oil or is
it fertilizer? I'm just going to guess
oil will get the priority. So, you know,
once this has a clear end date, at least
two to three weeks before we see
fertilizer come back out [music] of the
police.
>> [music]
[music]
>> So, obviously everything is still in
flux and I should just add our standard
disclaimer, which is we're recording
this on March 10th and who knows what
will happen by the time this episode
comes out, but
how do you anticipate this actually
feeding into food prices? I mean, this
is the big question. So, people use less
fertilizer, you get lower yields, supply
goes down, I assume prices go up or you
have farmers that continue to use
fertilizer, but it costs them a lot more
and so they have to offset it with
higher prices and prices still go up.
>> Yeah, I'll think of this in sort of a
time frame of when we might start to see
some of this like flow through the
system. It's the relationship between
fertilizer prices and when that piece of
food arrives on your dinner plate,
there's a lot of decisions and price
inputs to how that all works. But so
what we're thinking right now is
we'll see that in fact the market's
calling for a reduction of nitrogen
application rates here in the US. And so
I'm looking at what I might expect for
US corn yields to be this year. Last
year, we had a yield of 186 bushels per
acre. I'm thinking at this point that we
could see the US corn yield be 182
bushels. But again, we still have a long
road of production potential ahead of
us. A lot of the corn yield depends on
what the weather looks like during the
summer season, how soon farmers can get
out there and plant.
And then also, you know, the thing about
commodity prices is they'll snap up and
then they at these levels, you know, I
mentioned earlier this is a record we
were expecting to see a record urea to
corn price ratio. That will destroy a
lot of urea demand. And so, if
the strait reopened next week, you know,
you would see urea prices sort of snap
back to before
maybe you would see them snap back to
where they were before this war. So,
thinking about like food production and
the relationship with this. So, we're
planting now in the spring. I'm
expecting lower yields for corn, for
example. That corn isn't going to get
harvested until probably about September
or October of this year. And then it'll
have to move to, let's say a milling
location or an ethanol plant. Lower
yields is going to be something that'll
move through the food production system
over a time span of about a year or two.
>> All right, Alexis. Thank you so much for
coming on Off Bots and finally letting
us talk fertilizer. [music] I wish it
was under better circumstances, but this
was absolutely fascinating. Thank you.
>> Well, thank you for having [music] me.
It was my pleasure.
>> [music]
>> Joe, I'm never going to look at one of
those little packets that comes with
flowers, fresh flowers, the same way
again.
>> No, I I can't I never used this. I No,
maybe I maybe I put them in the water,
I'd no idea. But no, that was super
interesting and the sort of the money
chart for me was really seeing that urea
to corn futures ratio, which is very
clean and very elegant. And you can just
see farmers are how much stress they're
already feeling and then how much
additional stress they're seeing just in
the last weeks. But there haven't really
been good conditions for fertilizer
costs really since the pandemic. It has
seemed like, in particular since the war
in Ukraine started, this structural
shift in supply.
>> Yeah, so there are a few things that
stood out to me. So, number one, um,
tough times for farmers and it seems
like in all these instances the pain
usually falls on the smaller scale
farmers versus the big ones. I imagine
in this particular situation, if you're
a huge farmer out in Iowa or wherever,
you probably have enough scale to ensure
that you're still getting some sort of
fertilizer.
>> Yeah.
>> Those business relationships are going
to help you versus say a small-scale
farmer who's like making these decisions
on an individual basis. The other thing
that stood out to me, and we've heard
this before in our oil discussion with
Rory Johnston, this idea that, well,
again, the big fare better, so the US is
probably going to make it out better
than say in India which uses nat gas
from the Middle East in order to make
its own fertilizer.
And then the other thing that stood out
to me was that idea of storage. So,
>> Yeah.
>> we know that in commodities, storing
something can cost a lot of money and it
seems like fertilizer in particular
hasn't really been stored in the way
maybe some other metals have been
because, you know, most of the time you
only need it, I guess, twice a year, you
know, once in the southern hemisphere
and once in the northern hemisphere.
>> Yeah, it does not seem as though the
supply chain has been optimized for sort
of long-term accumulation. There aren't
strategic urea reserves the way there
are with other commodity reserves. It's
really going to be a mess. And you know,
what that is what we talked to Rory
Johnston about energy and you know,
again, in the US it's going to show up
mostly at higher prices in the pump.
Elsewhere, it's going to show up as
literally an unavailability, a reduction
in the amount of energy, the amount of
oil that's capable. It's really
disturbing to think like yeah, I mean
no one wants to pay higher groceries,
but it's a lot better than outright
famine, which is the risk when you do
such a massive shock to the food supply.
>> Yeah. All right, shall we leave it
there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the Odd
Lots podcast. I'm Tracy [music] Alloway.
You can follow me at Tracy Alloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at The Stalwart. Follow our producers
Carmen Rodriguez at Carmen Arman, Dasho
Bennett at Dash Bot, and Kilburg at
Kilburg. And for more Odd Lots content,
go to bloomberg.com/oddlots
for the daily newsletter and all of our
episodes. And you can chat about all of
these topics 24/7 in our Discord
discord.gg/oddlots. [music]
>> And if you enjoy Odd Lots, if you like
it when we talk fertilizer, then please
leave us a positive review on your
favorite podcast platform. [music]
And remember, if you are a Bloomberg
subscriber, you can listen to all of our
episodes absolutely ad-free. All you
need to do is find the Bloomberg channel
on Apple Podcasts and follow [music] the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.
>> [music]
[music]
>> Ooh.